README.md, before:

# realtime-polio
This pipeline complements [``RAMPART``](https://github.com/artic-network/rampart) and continues downstream analysis to consensus level.

<img src="https://github.com/aineniamh/realtime_polio/blob/master/rampart/figures/rampart_polio.png">

## Table of contents


  * [Requirements](#requirements)
  * [Installation](#installation)
  * [Setting up your run](#setting-up-your-run)
  * [Checklist](#checklist)
  * [Running RAMPART](#running-rampart)
  * [RAMPART command line options](#rampart-command-line-options)
  * [Downstream analysis](#downstream-analysis)
     * [Quick usage](#quick-usage)
     * [Pipeline description](#pipeline-description)
     * [Output](#output)
  * [Reference FASTA](#reference-fasta)
  * [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
  * [License](#license)

## Requirements
This pipeline will run on MacOS and Linux. An install of Miniconda will make the setup of this pipeline on your local machine much more streamlined. To install Miniconda, visit here https://conda.io/docs/user-guide/install/ in a browser, select your type of machine (mac or linux) and follow the link to the download instructions. We recommend to install the 64-bit Python 3.6 version of Miniconda. 

## Installation
Clone this repository:

```
git clone https://github.com/aineniamh/realtime-polio.git
```

1. Create the conda environment.
This may take some time, but will only need to be done once. It allows the pipeline to access all the software it needs, including RAMPART.

```
cd realtime-polio
conda env create -f environment.yml
```

2. Activate the conda environment.

```
conda activate realtime-polio
```

## Setting up your run


If you have a ``run_configuration.json`` file and a ``barcodes.csv`` file, you can run RAMPART with very few command line options. A template of the configuration files needed to run both RAMPART and the downstream analysis pipeline is provided in the examples directory.

The run_configuration.json can specify the path to your basecalled reads or alternatively you can input that information on the command line. `basecalledPath` should be set to wherever MinKNOW/guppy is going to write its basecalled files. If you want alter where the annotations files from RAMPART or the analysis files from the downstream pipeline are put, you can add the optional ``"annotatedPath"`` and ``"outputPath"`` options. By default the annotations are written to a directory called ``annotations`` and the analysis output is written to a directory called ``analysis``.

```
run_configuration.json

{
  "title": "MinION_run_example",
  "basecalledPath": "fastq_pass",
  "referencesLabel":"display_name"
}
```

Optional for RAMPART, but required for the downstream analysis pipeline, the ``barcodes.csv`` file describes which barcode corresponds to which sample. Note that you can have more than one barcode for each sample, but they will be merged in the analysis.

```
barcodes.csv

sample,barcode
sample1,BC01
sample2,BC02
sample3,BC03
sample4,BC04
```

## Checklist

- The conda environment ``realtime-polio`` is active.
- ``barcodes.csv`` file with sample to barcode mapping either in the current directory or the path to it will need to be provided.
- ``annotations`` directory with csv files from RAMPART
- The path to basecalled ``.fastq`` files is provided either in the ``run_configuration.json`` or it will need to be specified on the command line.

## Running RAMPART

Create run folder:

```
mkdir [run_name]
cd [run_name]
```

Where `[run_name]` is whatever you are calling todays run (as specified in MinKNOW).


With this setup, to run RAMPART:

```
rampart --protocol path/to/realtime-polio/rampart --referencesLabel display_name
```

Open a web browser to view [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000)

More information about RAMPART can be found [here](https://github.com/artic-network/rampart).

## RAMPART command line options

```
usage: rampart [-h] [-v] [--verbose] [--ports PORTS PORTS]
               [--protocol PROTOCOL] [--title TITLE]
               [--basecalledPath BASECALLEDPATH]
               [--annotatedPath ANNOTATEDPATH]
               [--referencesPath REFERENCESPATH]
               [--referencesLabel REFERENCESLABEL]
               [--barcodeNames BARCODENAMES [BARCODENAMES ...]]
               [--annotationOptions ANNOTATIONOPTIONS [ANNOTATIONOPTIONS ...]]
               [--clearAnnotated] [--simulateRealTime SIMULATEREALTIME]
               [--devClient] [--mockFailures]
```

## Downstream analysis

### Quick usage

Recommended: all samples can be analysed in parallel by editing the following command to give the path to realtime-polio and then typing it into the command line:

```
postbox -p path/to/realtime-polio
```

```
usage: postbox [-h] -p PROTOCOL [-q PIPELINE] [-d RUN_DIRECTORY]
               [-r RUN_CONFIGURATION] [-c CSV] [-t THREADS]
```

Alternatively, for each sample, the downstream analysis can be performed within the RAMPART GUI by clicking on the button to 'Analyse to consensus'.

## Pipeline description

The bioinformatic pipeline was developed using [snakemake](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/).

1. The server process of ``RAMPART`` watches the directory where the reads will be produced.
2. This snakemake takes each file produced in real-time and identifies the barcodes using [``porechop``](https://github.com/rambaut/Porechop).
3. Reads are mapped against a panel of references using [``minimap2``](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2). 
4. This information is collected into a csv file corresponding to each read file and the information is visualised in a web-browser, with depth of coverage and composition for each sample shown.
5. Once sufficient depth is achieved, the anaysis pipeline can be started for one sample at a time by clicking in the web browser or, to run analysis for all samples, type ``postbox -p path/to/realtime-polio`` on the command line.
6. The downstream analysis pipeline runs the following steps:
    - [``binlorry``](https://github.com/rambaut/binlorry) parses through the fastq files with barcode labels, pulling out the relevant reads and binning them into a single fastq file for each sample. It also applies a read-length filter (pre-set in the config file to only include full length amplicons).
    - The number of reads mapping to distinct viruses is assessed with a custom python script (``parse_ref_and_depth.py``) and reports whether multiple types of viruses are present in the sample and the number of corresponding reads. 
    - An iterative neural-net based polishing cycle is performed per virus type to provide a consensus sequence in ``.fasta`` format.  [``racon``](https://github.com/isovic/racon) and [``minimap2``](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2) are run iteratively four times, with gap removal in each round, against the fastq reads and then a final polishing consensus-generation step is performed using [``medaka consensus``](https://github.com/nanoporetech/medaka). 
    - The pipeline produces summary of the composition of each sample is provided and a report for each virus found, including distance to Sabin if vaccine-related.

### Output

By default the downstream analysis output will be put in a directory called ``analysis``. 

Within that directory will be:
- a ``reports`` directory with a file corresponding to each sample, detailing the virus present in the sample and how many SNPS from the closest reference in the database they are.
- a ``consensus_sequences`` directory with ``.fasta`` files for each sample. If the sample contained a mixture of viruses, all viruse sequences present at high enough levels in the sample will be in that file.
- ``sample_composition_summary.csv`` is a summary file that gives the raw read counts for each sample that have mapped to particular virus sequences. 

These are the main output files with summary information and the consensus sequences can be taken for further analysis at this point (i.e. alignments and phylogenetic trees). This directory also contains detailed output of the different steps performed in the analysis.

- ``binned_sample.csv`` and ``binned_sample.fastq`` are present for each sample. These are the output of ``BinLorry``. The csv file contains the mapping information from ``RAMPART``
- Within each ``binned_sample`` directory are many of the intermediate files produced during the analysis, including outputs of the rounds of racon polishing and medaka consensus generation. 

## Reference FASTA

The ``references.fasta`` file was provided by [Alex Shaw](https://github.com/AShaw1802) and is a detailed database containing VP1 sequences from an array of poliovirus sequences, including the Sabin vaccine strains, and other enteroviruses. 

## License

[GNU General Public License, version 3](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html)

Commit message:

readme update link to wiki

README.md, after:

# realtime-polio
This pipeline complements [``RAMPART``](https://github.com/artic-network/rampart) and continues downstream analysis to consensus level.

<img src="https://github.com/aineniamh/realtime_polio/blob/master/rampart/figures/rampart_polio.png">

## Table of contents


  * [Requirements](#requirements)
  * [Installation](#installation)
  * [Setting up your run](#setting-up-your-run)
  * [Checklist](#checklist)
  * [Running RAMPART](#running-rampart)
  * [RAMPART command line options](#rampart-command-line-options)
  * [Downstream analysis](#downstream-analysis)
     * [Quick usage](#quick-usage)
     * [Pipeline description](#pipeline-description)
     * [Output](#output)
  * [Reference FASTA](#reference-fasta)
  * [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
  * [License](#license)

## Requirements
This pipeline will run on MacOS and Linux. An install of Miniconda will make the setup of this pipeline on your local machine much more streamlined. To install Miniconda, visit here https://conda.io/docs/user-guide/install/ in a browser, select your type of machine (mac or linux) and follow the link to the download instructions. We recommend to install the 64-bit Python 3.6 version of Miniconda. 

## Installation
Clone this repository:

```
git clone https://github.com/aineniamh/realtime-polio.git
```

1. Create the conda environment.
This may take some time, but will only need to be done once. It allows the pipeline to access all the software it needs, including RAMPART.

```
cd realtime-polio
conda env create -f environment.yml
```

2. Activate the conda environment.

```
conda activate realtime-polio
```

## Setting up your run


If you have a ``run_configuration.json`` file and a ``barcodes.csv`` file, you can run RAMPART with very few command line options. A template of the configuration files needed to run both RAMPART and the downstream analysis pipeline is provided in the examples directory.

The run_configuration.json can specify the path to your basecalled reads or alternatively you can input that information on the command line. `basecalledPath` should be set to wherever MinKNOW/guppy is going to write its basecalled files. If you want alter where the annotations files from RAMPART or the analysis files from the downstream pipeline are put, you can add the optional ``"annotatedPath"`` and ``"outputPath"`` options. By default the annotations are written to a directory called ``annotations`` and the analysis output is written to a directory called ``analysis``.

```
run_configuration.json

{
  "title": "MinION_run_example",
  "basecalledPath": "fastq_pass",
  "referencesLabel":"display_name"
}
```

Optional for RAMPART, but required for the downstream analysis pipeline, the ``barcodes.csv`` file describes which barcode corresponds to which sample. Note that you can have more than one barcode for each sample, but they will be merged in the analysis.

```
barcodes.csv

sample,barcode
sample1,BC01
sample2,BC02
sample3,BC03
sample4,BC04
```

## Checklist

- The conda environment ``realtime-polio`` is active.
- ``barcodes.csv`` file with sample to barcode mapping either in the current directory or the path to it will need to be provided.
- ``annotations`` directory with csv files from RAMPART
- The path to basecalled ``.fastq`` files is provided either in the ``run_configuration.json`` or it will need to be specified on the command line.

## Running RAMPART

Create run folder:

```
mkdir [run_name]
cd [run_name]
```

Where `[run_name]` is whatever you are calling todays run (as specified in MinKNOW).


With this setup, to run RAMPART:

```
rampart --protocol path/to/realtime-polio/rampart --referencesLabel display_name
```

Open a web browser to view [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000)

More information about RAMPART can be found [here](https://github.com/artic-network/rampart).

## RAMPART command line options

```
usage: rampart [-h] [-v] [--verbose] [--ports PORTS PORTS]
               [--protocol PROTOCOL] [--title TITLE]
               [--basecalledPath BASECALLEDPATH]
               [--annotatedPath ANNOTATEDPATH]
               [--referencesPath REFERENCESPATH]
               [--referencesLabel REFERENCESLABEL]
               [--barcodeNames BARCODENAMES [BARCODENAMES ...]]
               [--annotationOptions ANNOTATIONOPTIONS [ANNOTATIONOPTIONS ...]]
               [--clearAnnotated] [--simulateRealTime SIMULATEREALTIME]
               [--devClient] [--mockFailures]
```

## Downstream analysis

### Quick usage

Recommended: all samples can be analysed in parallel by editing the following command to give the path to realtime-polio and then typing it into the command line:

```
postbox -p path/to/realtime-polio
```

```
usage: postbox [-h] -p PROTOCOL [-q PIPELINE] [-d RUN_DIRECTORY]
               [-r RUN_CONFIGURATION] [-c CSV] [-t THREADS]
```

Alternatively, for each sample, the downstream analysis can be performed within the RAMPART GUI by clicking on the button to 'Analyse to consensus'.

## Pipeline description

The bioinformatic pipeline was developed using [snakemake](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/).

1. The server process of ``RAMPART`` watches the directory where the reads will be produced.
2. This snakemake takes each file produced in real-time and identifies the barcodes using [``porechop``](https://github.com/rambaut/Porechop).
3. Reads are mapped against a panel of references using [``minimap2``](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2). 
4. This information is collected into a csv file corresponding to each read file and the information is visualised in a web-browser, with depth of coverage and composition for each sample shown.
5. Once sufficient depth is achieved, the anaysis pipeline can be started for one sample at a time by clicking in the web browser or, to run analysis for all samples, type ``postbox -p path/to/realtime-polio`` on the command line.
6. The downstream analysis pipeline runs the following steps:
    - [``binlorry``](https://github.com/rambaut/binlorry) parses through the fastq files with barcode labels, pulling out the relevant reads and binning them into a single fastq file for each sample. It also applies a read-length filter (pre-set in the config file to only include full length amplicons).
    - The number of reads mapping to distinct viruses is assessed with a custom python script (``parse_ref_and_depth.py``) and reports whether multiple types of viruses are present in the sample and the number of corresponding reads. 
    - An iterative neural-net based polishing cycle is performed per virus type to provide a consensus sequence in ``.fasta`` format.  [``racon``](https://github.com/isovic/racon) and [``minimap2``](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2) are run iteratively four times, with gap removal in each round, against the fastq reads and then a final polishing consensus-generation step is performed using [``medaka consensus``](https://github.com/nanoporetech/medaka). 
    - The pipeline produces summary of the composition of each sample is provided and a report for each virus found, including distance to Sabin if vaccine-related.

### Output

By default the downstream analysis output will be put in a directory called ``analysis``. 

Within that directory will be:
- a ``reports`` directory with a file corresponding to each sample, detailing the virus present in the sample and how many SNPS from the closest reference in the database they are.
- a ``consensus_sequences`` directory with ``.fasta`` files for each sample. If the sample contained a mixture of viruses, all viruse sequences present at high enough levels in the sample will be in that file.
- ``sample_composition_summary.csv`` is a summary file that gives the raw read counts for each sample that have mapped to particular virus sequences. 

These are the main output files with summary information and the consensus sequences can be taken for further analysis at this point (i.e. alignments and phylogenetic trees). This directory also contains detailed output of the different steps performed in the analysis.

- ``binned_sample.csv`` and ``binned_sample.fastq`` are present for each sample. These are the output of ``BinLorry``. The csv file contains the mapping information from ``RAMPART``
- Within each ``binned_sample`` directory are many of the intermediate files produced during the analysis, including outputs of the rounds of racon polishing and medaka consensus generation. 

## Reference FASTA

The ``references.fasta`` file was provided by [Alex Shaw](https://github.com/AShaw1802) and is a detailed database containing VP1 sequences from an array of poliovirus sequences, including the Sabin vaccine strains, and other enteroviruses. 

## Troubleshooting

If you're having issues running the pipeline, and you're certain the checklist has been ticked off, check out some common [issues on the wiki](https://github.com/aineniamh/realtime-polio/wiki).

## License

[GNU General Public License, version 3](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html)
